Although analyzing restaurant data is something handled by large firms like Upserve, there are thousands of restaurants around the country and in your own neighborhood that 
don't take advantage of services that could analyze data already being collected by POS systems. Actionable data is left to molder in cloud storage while the average restaurant
owner is too busy handling daily tasks and too afraid to try and learn tech skills - and too busy to even have it on their radar. Staffing shortages, food cost increases, prep
take up all their waking thoughts - leaving data analysis of customer trends to the big players in the restaurant industry: Darden, Coca Cola, Upserve, Lightspeed, Square and the like.

My goal is to create a template, of sorts, that will import a CSV file and merge it with US Census data to look for trends, and then market that service to small and medium-sized 
restaurants and regional small chains.  One POS  industry rep I spoke with says that most of the hundred customers he currently has don't take advantage of the free email service 
that Lightspeed offers. Email.  It's been around since the beginning, the template is set up, and still indepedent restaurant owners from Tennessee to Florida to Mississippi aren't
taking advantage of the service. He recognizes the business they are losing but like most restaurant owners I know (and I know dozens) - they're too busy or too scared to lay a hand 
on a computer keyboard for anything other than ordering food for the restaurant or printing out an Excel-made schedule. 

Open project with: "According to a survey by Fifth Third Bancorp, 96% of Americans knowingly consume extremely hot foods or drinks that burn their mouths, and 63% do so frequently.
We live for instant gratification. We are so impatient that most of us willingly dig in to a cup of coffee or a plate of dinner before it has a chance to cool off. In fact, 
that burn is kind of gratifying in itself.  But patience is a virtue when it comes to analyzing sales data, or you would think so when you realize the hesitancy restaurant owners
have in digging in to monthly sales numbers. 

Below are some of the questions I have so far:

Find and graph location where customers live, mapped to the area around a restaurant. 
Analyze the busiest and slowest average days, and times within those days.  This information can be used for staff scheduling, offering suggestions for boosting sales (half-off
appetizers or happy hour sound familiar?) 

Track average number of times each unique customer visits, which day/time they visit. How many are repeat customers? How many are one-offs?  

Check to see how long a customer stays - min, max, avg

Number of drinks sold - is more when a particular server is working? They could adapt training to have that server share their secrets for upselling drinks. 

What is the most profitable dish on the menu?  GFS, Sysco, Reinhart, US Foods all have internal cloud-based software that can track that, but it's not often been used, 
in my experience.  Can those food vendors export CSV or Excel data to me? Or can the customer export it themselves?

Combine restaurant with census data somehow - average salary of the guests in their zip code, to know if they should offer lower-priced options.  GIS cellphone mapping - is
that an option to analyze?

Data from POS:
names, emails (coupons for birthday or to come back after an extended absence), home address (for census data), birthdays, food allergies?, favorite dishes (pair unique
names with dishes to intuit this)

Does FOH track wait time, average party size, guest count  => table size choice, identify bottlenecks and adjust schedule to fix. 

Average inventory compared to peak and slow times - predict ordering. If bestseller on a Friday night is steak - be able to set pars, or inventory levels to keep on hand, for
those times/days. 

Turnaround time, deduct time a check is input from checkout time
Online ordering sales from POS system, as well as 3rd parties like GrubHub, Uber Eats, etc.

In POS, tickets - is there an average ticket time? Maybe get from item input time from checkout time minus 20 minutes to eat - or dessert time input, where available.

"seating analytics" is a phrase to use. 
Get customer info for repeat guests - offer discount or special offers to the best customers. 

Who are the top-performing servers? The lowest performing servers?
Track server performance - is one server selling 60% of all wines? Desserts? Liquor is nearly 100% profit, with almost no labor cost associated with it. Find that server's 
secreat, pair them with low-performing servers. Pair top servers with VIPs. Anecdotally restaurant owners know who their most popular servers are - but do the numbers back that up?
Track a campaign with POS analytics: Taco Tuesday, Oyster Wednesday, Mothers Day prix fixe menu, brunch... is it worth it to continue? Add another?
Do you sell alot of grilled chicken sandwiches to guests only to never see them again?  (look for dishes with unique guests)
or if 1 of your lower-selling items creates a higher-than-average percent of return guests  (mu =  , sgl dep t test)
highlighting this item, training servers to promote it, or updating its name or description could help sell more of that dish and more importantly, create returning guests.
Every restaurant wants all stars and no dogs on their menu -   menu analysis - stars, dogs, 
Social media data:  # of followers, avg reach, avg engagement rate, "insights" can share info

Data-driven organizations are 23 times more likely to acquire $ than their less agile peers - therail.media

Businesses using big data can expect an average profit increase of 10%. 
Could compare guests' dish choice to periods of the day or day of the week to customize the menu. Increases kitchen efficiency if you can focus on fewer menu items. 

Big data can give long and short term schedules. How? Automate to run every two weeks based on YTD historical data AND the last two weeks. 

Boost customer loyalty - it costs 5X to attract a new customer than it does to keep an existing customer's loyalty. 

Trend prediction - linear regression, web scraping

National Restaurant Association
Industry KPI
KPI worth following include gross margin per product sold, gross profit, COGS...


NRA offers data checklist lavidge.com
info@lavidge.com

categorize food and beverage in POS
evaluate what your payments processor may have to offer. It has data regarding guests. (Know that Square sells all the data that is uploaded from each user's POS)
upserve.com

Locals 8 restaurant group is using Upserve
Enterprise Data Warehouse - provides a platform for combining data across multiple systems. 
ETL is the heart of EDW 
extraction - gets data out of source system and centralizes it
transformation - maps data coming in to the data model assigned by me
loading - takes data from staging area to production EDW where everyone can see it 

MichiganStateUniversityOnline.com
dining on Big Data
 
 Once you know that people who buy "A" also like item "B" you get insight from a promotional standpoint and a bundling standpoint. 
 #new vs returning guests - frequency an item is ordered and when 
 can provide feedback via tabletop device surveys on iPads (tie it with POS customer data) - like Applebee's already does. 
 
 Affregate customer demographic data (% baby boomers, %gen X, % millenials) 

